Meeting open. Welcome everybody. So we'll start with the apologies and I guess we have Hazel, everyone else seems to be here I think. So could I have a mover please? Andrew, just before you do, I have to leave the meeting at 1.30 to attend a future proof meeting. So sorry about that. So my apologies from then. Good as gold, thanks Jim. So should we include that in the motion as well? If someone would like to move please. Happy to move Mike. Thanks Lou, thanks Susan. All in favour? Aye. Contrary no, that's carried. Disclosure of members' interests. Do we have any today? No, I'll move on to item four, late items. Any late items? No late items. So confirmation of order of meeting. No changes, Ken? No, I don't see any need for change. We do have a number of guests joining us at the meeting today, but they're well aware of the time. So yes, I'm hoping they'll be here at the required time. Happy to move Andrew, Graeme. Thanks Graeme. A seconder? I second, Susan. Thanks Susan, I think that was. Cheers. All in favour, please say aye. Aye. Contrary no, carried. Okay, item six, which is confirmation of the minutes from 18 February. Have we all, I'll take those as being read. Anything raised from those minutes? Andrew, Graeme speaking. My diary's showing me that I was at that meeting, but my name's not recorded there. Right. Yeah, I was going to bring that up too. So yeah, I think there's some mistakes. Thanks Bruce. Okay, so I'm sure we can have that remedied, Sam. Yeah, I was just considering. Yes, we'll make the changes. Thank you. Okay, so with that change, could I have a mover for the minutes to be received as a true and correct record, please? Thank you, Marcus. Seconder? I'll second it. Thanks, Bruce. All in favour, please say aye. Aye. Contrary no, carried. Thank you. Item seven, Jason. Has Jason joined us? He has, I see him nodding. Hi Jason, how are you doing? Good, thank you. Great, and the floor is yours. Okay, Sam, I don't think we had issues with trying to get the presentation, is that right? Oh no, Sam is sharing, brilliant. Perfect, thanks Sam. Good morning, or good afternoon, sorry everyone. Thanks for allowing me time just to give you a quick update on where we are as a sector for tourism and particularly for Waipa District. So a report has obviously been provided to you and prepared, which was our last six months performance at the end of 31st December, 2019. As you would have seen, Waipa District Council was going through significant growth, pretty one of the fastest growing regions for us with regards to tourism impact. You were experiencing double digit growth pretty much through visitor expenditure and also commercial accommodation. But we are here today to discuss just obviously a bit of a change in the dynamic given COVID and the impact for tourism, particularly as a sector. If we can go to the next slide, Sam. Perfect. So just first a couple of slides, obviously, just covering off some data. We're now receiving international and national data on a weekly basis from the government and also from the airlines. So no surprise, obviously, since COVID lockdown and international travel restrictions were put in place, international visitor arrivals into New Zealand have been dropping at a very sharp rate. We still do have airline connectivity, which I will go through because we are still maintaining what we call a baseline service for connections across the world, mainly for repatriation flights, but also for cargo and service across the country as well. Next slide, Sam. So weekly card transactions, again, no surprise, obviously, overall, our visitor expenditure is down significantly. But when you do look onto the list, top five, obviously, food, liquor and pharmacies, we are still seeing some cumulative and some obviously weekly growth in expenditure compared to all our other visitor type expenditure and transactions as well. Thanks, Sam. So the impact for us as a sector, again, look, I mean, all of this has been reported, but just to cover off in summary, we were already impacted through the loss of China group travel, which started in the second to last week of January. So with that, a lot of our international facing products, our hotels, our motels, our Airbnbs were immediately impacted by that because many of China group travel actually did stay in the Waikato. They were our fourth largest international visitor market behind Australia, North America, and UK and Europe. It did shut us down pretty much once international travel restrictions hit us. And the visitor economy covers more than just the tourism operators. Again, we've mentioned accommodation. It also impacts retail, hospitality, transport providers, our operators, of course, but also event organisers in major venues. And of course, Mystery Creek of Aunty Drone and Lake Harapero are key event platforms for Waipa District. We have had significant job losses and business closures across tourism. I have down underneath that last bullet point, look, the immediate business impact that we have been coaching our businesses through and helping them get through. As some have gone into what we call temporary or seasonal closure. So again, we have a lot of seasonality in tourism. Many who would close for winter have closed, but those that potentially have never closed before, we've suggested they go into hibernation. And so that's what we're calling temporary seasonal closures. We've had a number of businesses, you know, Hobbiton was obviously one of the most public ones reported in the media. But again, all our motels, hotels, retail, hospitality, have pretty much reduced service and staff. There's only essential services operating as we know. But again, with alert level three, we do see some opening up potentially in the hospitality sector for Waipara anyway. And then the last, obviously, implication for us is we have had a number of businesses who are permanently closing. Not only are these a loss definitely to the tourism industry to try and bring people back when we don't have products, but also particularly for those vulnerable communities where some of these operators have been going for many years. Thanks, Sam. Sorry, can I ask a question about that? Sure. Have you got examples of what businesses are struggling and like what, who isn't closing, like who is closing and how it is impacting around the wider district? Yeah, so particularly for Waipara, it is mainly being your hospitality, potentially some of your retail and also accommodation. So we've had many, nearly all of your accommodation has pretty much gone into hibernation or closure. They're calling it temporary closure, but some of them have been able to access the wage subsidy, which is great. But again, what we're gonna see is the impacts are longer than the 12-week wage subsidy right now. So it's post 12 weeks, what we're quite concerned about. We have been lobbying nationally, the government, and I think that's all sectors, not just tourism, around potentially extending the wage subsidy for 20 weeks, because it will take a lot to restart the tourism sector. Again, people's propensity to travel is quite low. We will travel locally and potentially we will travel intra-regionally, so staying within the region, but to try and stand up the domestic travel market is gonna be a long haul that we're looking at a six to 12 months recovery plan for that. Great. So lastly, look, I mean, no surprise here, this was just something we do for industries, people know where we all fit. So from the tourism perspective, when we respond, obviously we're providing the industry support right now at a national level, regional level, and also at a local level, but then we have Te Waka, our chambers of commerce, our business associations, and all local government have been great in actually supporting us with what we call the business and community support side for tourism businesses. And then lastly, we're obviously partnered with the Civil Defence Network around providing welfare support, not just for tourism operators. Again, it's also been utilising tourism operators. Many of our caterers have now been repurposed into providing food services, pretty much, or supporting the food banks and actually cooking meals. We also have a number of our transport operators in tourism being basically requisitioned now to provide transport options and actually getting people around, such as essential workers. And many of the staff, potentially, we've been redeploying into the Civil Defence Network through providing security and welfare and call centre as well. So not only are we also working with Civil Defence, we're also putting staff into there as well. Thanks, Sam. Even though we're obviously dealing with COVID, this is just for you to be aware, there are obviously continuing issues that were going on with COVID and with the tourism industry. First up was domestic airline connectivity. So look, Air New Zealand has been pretty open that they will not be restarting until alert level one. So we meet with Air New Zealand weekly just to see how we will try and stand the industry back up again. They're gonna focus very much on what we call an incremental restart. So it's doing a width and breadth strategy across the country. So potentially maybe only two or three flights into Hamilton per day. But again, it's to try and get that reach across the whole network first before they can actually stand up and have a full schedule like we have seen out of Hamilton Airport, particularly over the last three to four years. Airline connectivity internationally is still continuing. So those are just a summary of some of the ones that are still flying. So look, Air New Zealand are still connecting into North America and Hong Kong, into Australia. Fiji Airlines are still flying into Fiji on a daily service. And Qatar has probably used the most to try and repatriate Northern Hemisphere travellers back to their homes through Qatar. And then also Korean Airlines are still operating a daily service as well. For future, again, Air New Zealand are saying they will be focusing very much on the domestic market first. They will traditionally be a domestic airline for the first six to 12 months. And domestic also includes Australia and the Pacific. American Airlines so far have been the only one we've met with who plan to return to New Zealand from October 2020. So they have put a stake in the ground to say when they will start flying into New Zealand again. Now, the reason why I just raised international airline connectivity is because it will take this country at least two to five years before we ever go back to the type of connectivity we've had as a country previously before lockdown. So again, it's gonna be a very long burn for us as a country to regain the international visitor arrivals we've seen in the past. Air traffic control services are up for review. The reason why I just put that in there is just to let everyone know there was no Waikato airports or airfields, but particularly Hamilton airport isn't impacted. But for us in the central North Island, Rotorua is one that is gonna be impacted around potentially the closure of air traffic control tower services. That will mean potentially that we will be re-diverting the domestic network through Tauranga and Hamilton. So unfortunately for Rotorua's loss, it could be our gain. And then lastly, we've still got the investigation underway around Whakaari, White Island. So the WorkSafe investigation should be coming to a close shortly. There will be impacts on the tourism and suppliers around adventure tourism for this country. And also we will be up weighting Qualmark, which is our accreditation programme, particularly around health and safety for the country. Thanks Sam. Just some event updates. As you know, Field Days is going online. So from the 30th of June for two weeks, Field Days will be providing a virtual exhibition space, very similar to other international events who offer this type of experience. Again, it is a trial, but we do hope to bring Field Days back in 2021. Obviously not only is it the largest major event for Waipa, but it's definitely for the Waikato with regards to economic impact. We worked due to host the New Zealand Tourism Awards in November, that has been postponed until next year. So we will reset the date for that. Explore and Trends, these are what we call our two main international trade shows that have obviously been delayed. Trends 2021, which is the main time when we actually sell the Waikato to the world, we will not be having until maybe June next year. So it's just a waiting on a date for that. Two major convention centres were due to open this year, Te Pai and Christchurch, which potentially is the one that will be taking a lot of business away for us for business events. That has now been delayed for another year. And of course, the New Zealand International Convention Centre, we will not know the reopening date of that until they work through the final insurance claims. So again, by having these two convention centres not operating means that places like Coordalins and the Mystery Creek Event Centre are gonna be filling the gap for national and international conferences for the short term, which is actually a good opportunity for us again as a region post COVID. But we also do still have events planned. So the major events, obviously, the National Waka Ama is at this stage, still planned to take effect in Lake Karapero. And we also have our first major event for the region, the ICC Women's Cricket World Cup scheduled for the 8th of February. Again, this one will particularly be decided by around October, November, whether we see international travel restrictions have lifted to enable some of the players to come. Otherwise they will have to go into, if it does continue into isolation until the Cricket World Cup can be held. So what we have seen particularly for other parts of the sector is that events have been more postponed for Waipa and for the wider Waikato region rather than completely cancelled and not returning. So there is some positivity for us as we do see this as the lead sector to inter-recovery economically and socially for the district. Next slide, Sam. So response, we have a three-tiered response plan. Obviously, this is no similar to everyone else right now. We have a mitigate process, which we're currently in now. We then have a restart phase and then we have a re-imagine phase. So initially in the response phase, no different to everyone else, lots of briefings, lots of support. We're obviously having face-to-face briefings across all the sector long before the shutdown. And now we've moved to the virtual space. We're still doing advocacy at a national level to try and make sure we can access more business support for the region. Some of the gap right now out of government support and out of the support that Te Waka can provide is it doesn't cover any employees for 100 employees plus. So that's quite the pointy end of town, we call it, for most of our region, for our big employers. Again, wage subsidy, okay, but outside of that, there's actually no large industry support. So we've been pushing that through government to try and unlock some of that if this lockdown continues. We've been doing one-on-one operator check-ins. We have 240 listed operators with us. So again, these are daily to weekly check-ins by all our teams to make sure everyone's been able to access business advice and some of the wage support. We've been doing webinars and we've now moved in the last two weeks into workforce redeployment. So again, we've been taking some organisations or employers that have maybe at least five to 10 staff members displaced through to Hobbiton, who had one of the largest at around 270, and actually redeploying them and offering them redeployment options into the kiwifruit industry. We placed 110 staff into kiwifruit with transport from Hobbiton, as well as the avocado industry, which will be the next seasonal workforce will be standing up until the end of the year. We put staff into supermarkets, civil defence, security, and also they've been providing some services from home. But again, what we are going to see over the next two weeks, and we're starting to measure that, is the full impacts of people that we cannot redeploy, that potentially will be out of work. So there is currently a survey underway and we'll be updating all councils and the government around the overall impact for tourism in Waikato. Thanks Sam. Under the restart phase, so again, we want to congratulate local government because obviously getting some of those shovel-ready projects through with the Crown Infrastructure Partners for their consideration is a great win for the region, but potentially for the sector. Pretty much every district has put up around one to two tourism projects as part of shovel-ready. So again, we do need to focus on the future and how we'll restart the region. Research, we were already in market and about to finish up our domestic perceptions and major research. This is now becoming quite timely for us and will help us inform around how we will try and bring back the domestic travellers into the region based on some of the research we've undertaken. We're also working on a major in business events restart campaign. So that planning has been underway for a couple of weeks so that when we're ready to go, we can push go on that. We do see events and business events and corporate travel as being the kickstarter we need for economic and social recovery across the region. New developments, again, you've all got new developments going on potentially in your regions. Hidden Lake, obviously one of your newest hotels in Cambridge only opened on Christmas Eve. So Glenda and the team we've been keeping in touch with quite a lot because they haven't been in operation very long. Their impacts are quite severe. So again, making sure that we still have some future developments that will continue across the region to take us through the next stage. Data and insights I've touched on, they've now gone to weekly. So again, we're sharing that information and Te Waka are now, we're contributing to the Te Waka Economic Outlook as well, which is great. And then lastly, the Mighty Local campaign was launched two weeks ago and it's definitely around the restart phase. Thanks, Sam. So Mighty Local, again, is a partnership with ourselves, Te Waka, all the chambers of commerce, so Te Amutu and obviously Cambridge Chamber of Commerce, plus the Waikato Chamber of Commerce, all our councils, the business associations that also exist in some communities and all our regional eyesights. We're in phase one. So for the last two weeks, we've been promoting businesses with contactless delivery, promoting people that are still doing entertainment online or virtually from within Waikato, recipes from our beloved chefs, well-being and fitness. And this week we launched business stories. So again, we're starting to use this platform to promote some of the businesses and how they're pivoting into obviously response or looking at different opportunities for their business. So the idea is to try and give people hope during phase one. During phase two, which is obviously from alert level three, we will increase our takeaway and E3B listings and also essential services are starting to grow as well. In phase two, we will move more to a local phase. At the moment, it's a regional platform, but the idea is potentially people will be able to group the types of information and services available at a local community level and at a district level as well. And then phase three, which has been hopefully all travel restrictions are lifted. We will then activate the basically the buy local, eat local, event local shop, visit and explore within the region. And obviously that's in partnership with many communities and business associations that already have local programs such as Cambridge with their totally locally Cambridge campaign. So we're working with Kelly and the team around how we would try and push the program rather than this one once we get to phase three. Thanks Sam. And when it comes to how we will actually respond long-term, so at the moment we're in phase one. So we're calling it the hyper-local phase. So one to three months, we'll be pushing basically localism, everything to do with obviously how you purchase and interact with your local community. At phase two, which then we'll move into a three to six month bracket, we're estimating we can then start to do intra-regional travel. So we'll be targeting the drive market within the Waikato region. We'll be hopefully starting to stand up community events again that can happen at a local level and regional business meetings might be able to begin again with social distancing. At level three, which is what we're planning our scenarios for six to 12 months, we can then stand up the domestic market. That is when potentially we will mainly focus on drive. So as you've heard me say before, 2.5 potentially 3 million people live within three hours radius of the Waikato region, including the region itself. So we'll definitely be focusing on the drive market. National events will be returning as well as national meetings and then eventually corporate travel, which again, business are quite a good lead for us with regards to stand up the sector again. And then lastly, we're planning on one to two years before we actually start to see any sort of international impact again. Short haul markets into Australia and the Pacific will open first. And then we will eventually move back into major events, international conferences and starting to bring back the corporate and leisure travel market into Waikato. So that's the timeframe we are currently doing our scenario planning for, but as we all know, it may change every week based on the alert levels we have. And then lastly, reimagine. So you would have seen that last week or actually two weeks ago as well, the government announced that there was a call to reshape and reimagine the tourism industry. So we have been pushing for the last two to three months with Tourism New Zealand and the Minister for Tourism around what we're calling a reimagining of tourism. Now is our chance that this is more than a shock, it's actually a bit of a circuit breaker for the sector and for all business sectors, for us all to look and see how could we do our businesses differently. We all knew that tourism was growing at quite an exponential rate and there were some areas that were really feeling the pressure such as Queenstown and Central Otago and Cathedral Cove, some of our sites, Mount Tongariro. So for us now, it's great to see the government are taking this seriously. So we're now working with Tourism New Zealand to lead a new plan domestically and internationally, but also look at all these types of questions. Were our previous visitor arrivals and expenditure growth right for the region? What will success look like for us for the future for a visitor market? How do we move our sector from boom and bust, again, no different to the food and fibre sector or any other business cycle? And lastly, how do we move to a more sustainable community-led tourism? And for us in the Waikato, what we call creating net benefit, rather than just benefiting those that potentially were making money out of tourism, we want to see communities thrive and that they have the decision around what sort of tourism they want. So again, we will be moving our 2016 Tourism Opportunities Plan, which many of you were involved in. We will now be developing a Destination Management Plan and that'll be happening nationally as well to try and what we call transform tourism for the better. So there is no such word as recovery now. We will not be receiving the same sorts of level of tourism as we did previously, but neither we might not have the same sort of services and opportunities available in tourism as well post COVID. So again, it is a good opportunity for us to look at transforming the sector. I think Sam, I think we've got one more. Look, and lastly, just obviously a call, I call it to all my local government partners. I really appreciate everyone helping to promote your rates relief remissions and instalment policies, not just for the tourism sector, but for all business. It's great to see you all continuing with your resource consent process, maybe in a more delayed way, but again, the liquor and food licensing is going to be more important for us, particularly when we try and stand up after Alert Level 3. We still have the regional major event strategy activation. So again, we are still awaiting some decision from Well Energy Trust about potentially helping to establish a regional major events fund, which will actually assist all the districts to be able to bid for major events again, and also to attract and bid new major events into our shoulder season across the region. And then lastly, again, just to thank you all for your continual funding to support the tourism industry, and that would obviously be more important through restart and the re-imagined phase. And again, the point I made earlier, we will not be recovering to pre-COVID levels for at least two to five years as a sector and as a region. That's pretty much it from me, I think. So happy to take any questions. Thanks. Thanks, Jason. That's, I've got to say, that's a fantastic response to what must have been a massive shock to the industry. Yeah, and of course, in Waipa and probably a lot of Waikato as well, domestic tourism is actually a lot bigger than international, so we really want to see, and as you have in your plan, that being worked on as soon as it becomes a possibility. But yeah, does anyone have questions? Just put your hands up, I can see you all. Claire. Okay, yeah, thanks a lot, Jason. And yeah, fantastic effort, I think, being put in by all your team in this situation. A couple of questions. Well, the first one was that I noticed that in the regional major event strategy, there's a new funding partner mentioned. Is that the Well Energy relationship, or is it? All right. Great, you said it's Well Energy. Yeah, no, that's great. And the other thing is, for your reimagining, you know, the future of tourism, I saw that you had your stakeholders listed. I didn't see the Department of Conservation there, not that they are a tourism operator, but most of our popular destinations, you know, I think of Cathedral Cove, you know, they're actually managed by the department. And I just wonder if it'd be worthwhile trying to get them sort of around the table, so that, because I hear, you know, they worry about the pressure points that we were experiencing, and that, you know, just having their input, you know, might be beneficial. Yes, no, look, absolutely. So, yes, sorry about that, Clare. The Department of Conservation are part of that. So it's actually a joint Tourism New Zealand and DOC review of tourism. And it's only because they both actually contributed to the National Tourism Aotearoa Strategy. So they're definitely part of it. We don't obviously have a lot of any national parks, but we do still have a lot of Crown Estate. And some of the Crown Estate in our region are obviously some of our waterfalls and lake areas. So again, and along our rivers, they will be engaging in that as well, because we did obviously have some opportunities with DOC originally before COVID, to look at developing short walks for the region under the Great Walks Mantle. So that's some projects that we now have brought forward, again, to say, can, will DOC reconsider moving some of this for the domestic market? Oh, that sounds fantastic. Yeah, well done. Do we have any other questions? Liz. Yeah, I guess just a huge thank you, Jason, to the support you have for the operators. You know, I've been affected a little myself and the calls that I get from your team are very encouraging. That's very certain. Just one of the things I just wanted to check in with you on and that's, we do have a presentation a little bit later from Manga Tautiri, and I see you've also given them some support, and that's really great, who are reliant on a lot of the international visitors. And I guess it's lucky for us in some ways that there's not that many Waipao operators that are reliant on internationals. Manga Tautiri is probably one of them. Perhaps our eyesight to a certain degree in servicing international guests. But other than that, do you think that there are any other aspects of Waipao that are going to be greatly affected with internationals? Because that's really where the biggest, you know, issues are going to be. It's mainly going to be the sports, the sports code. So I think if we can try and get some of the international sporting events back up and running as soon as possible, depending on travel restrictions, they would be the main impact for Waipao. But you are correct, look, pretty much most of our events, which are great, and our operators pretty much talk to the domestic market. And I still feel that.
