29th, 2026, Medford City Council is called to order. Mr. Clerk, please call the roll. Councilor Kelly. Councilor Lemming. Present. Councilor Maloney. Present. Councilor Scapelli. Present. Councilor Singh. Present. Vice President Lazaro. Present. And President Beard. Present. Seven present, none absent. Please rise to salute the flag. Announcements, accolades, remembrances, reports, and records. The records of the meeting of May 26, 2026 were passed to Councilor Singh. Councilor Singh, how did you find those records? I find them in order and move to approve. The records of the special joint meeting of May 27, 2026 and June 3, 2026 were passed to Councilor Lemming. How did you find those records? The ones from June 3, I would motion to change the spelling of Wokling. I could see that there's a misspelling in there. But pending that change, move to approve. All right, we'll correct that. And then reports of committees, we had 26061, Committee of the Whole, May 26, May 27, and June 2, those were all fiscal year 2027 budget meetings. Is there a motion to approve the records and reports of committees as amended? On the motion to approve the records and reports of committees as amended by Councilor Millane, seconded by? Seconded by Councilor Singh. Mr. Clerk, please call the roll. Councilor Kelly. Councilor Lemming. Yes. Councilor Malauulu. Yes. Councilor Scarpelli. Yes. Councilor Singh. Yes. Vice President Lazaro. Yes. And President Beers. Yes. I'm in the affirmative, none in the negative. The motion passes. Vice President Lazaro. Oh, thank you. Motion to take items 25189 and 25084 out of order. On the motion to take papers 25189 and 26084 from unfinished business for third reading by Vice President Lazaro, seconded by? Seconded by Councilor Callahan. Mr. Clerk, please call the roll. Councilor Kelly. Yes. Councilor Lemming. Yes. Councilor Millane. Yes. Councilor Scarpelli. Yes. Councilor Singh. Yes. Vice President Lazaro. Yes. And President Beers. Yes. I'm in the affirmative, none in the negative. The motion passes. Give me one moment. 25189, Amendment to Chapter 2, Article 5, Division 2, Medford Standard Compensation Ordinance. In City Council, April 20th, 2026, approved for first reading. To be advertised May 14th, 2026, Medford Transcript and Stone Marvel Journal. It was advertised and it's in City Council June 9th, 2026, eligible for third reading. This is the standard compensation ordinance, which is to create a wage floor for the folks in janitorial and security services who are not otherwise covered by the prevailing wage schedules of the state. They were exempted and that means that cities can pay these folks less than the prevailing wage for the work that they do. There are a number of things in this ordinance. The main purpose of it, as we discussed at first reading, is to create a system for a wage floor and fair wages and benefits for the contracted services that our city contracts out for our buildings. And right now that is mainly our janitorial services. There's a lot of history here. This was first proposed in December after some serious concerns about some harmful impacts on folks who had been working for the city in janitorial services at Medford Public Schools, folks who lost their jobs, folks who were really put in very difficult situations because our city doesn't have an ordinance like this. And really, you know, one of the most important things that this ordinance will provide for our city is more certainty in how we are procuring these kinds of services and more stability in making sure that we get good services on the market. So that is just something that is essential not only from like a values perspective and a contracting out work, we are paying fair wages and benefits to the people who are doing that work, but it is also important for the city that we are having good services, stable services, the services that we need to keep our buildings clean and well maintained. So that is the purpose of this ordinance. Over the last month and a half since the first reading, I did have some meetings with the city administration. We have made some, we've had good discussions. We've made some progress. I do want to read a letter from the administration. Give me one second to find it. I don't know why it's not showing up here. And I know that the administration might have, yes, Chief of Staff. Thank you, President Behrs. I just want to note that Paul Riggi is on the line and could potentially communicate the communication that was sent over to the council to yourself and then to the council as well. Sure. That's easier. If that's the preference, if that's your preference, Paul, if you would want to read the letter that you sent over today, I'll recognize you. Thank you, President Behrs. This letter came, is coming from myself and Fiona Maxwell, the, our Director of Procurement. We are respectfully requesting that the council postpone final passage of the proposed standard compensation ordinance on June 9th to allow additional time for the working group consisting of President Behrs, Attorney Janelle Austin, Chief of Staff Nina Nazarian, and the undersigned, myself and Fiona, to complete its review and finalize any recommended amendments to ensure that the terms of this ordinance are clearly defined, able to be implemented, enforceable, and minimize liability to the city. As you know, the school department's cleaning services vendor has been notified that the city is exercising year two of the existing contract, extending services through June 30th, 2027. Additionally, the city's cleaning services contract is being extended through June 30th, 2027 through FAC 114, which is the state contract as the procurement method. With both contracts secured for FY 2027, the group is in a good position to continue evaluating the proposed amendments and work toward a thoroughly reviewed and finalized ordinance before seeking final approval. While significant progress has been made, several key sections still require further review, including enforcement authority, exceptions and waivers, wage rate, labor peace, establishment of the standard compensation rate applicable to future procurement processes. For that, we need analysis from our finance director, who currently has been working on the citywide budget, transitional employment period, and definitions and effective date. Although the group has made meaningful progress, there is still work to be done. Additional time would allow the working group to complete its review thoughtfully and provide the council with well-vetted recommendations. For these reasons, we respectfully request that the city council defer final action on the ordinance and provide the working group with additional time to complete its review and present any final amendments for consideration. Thank you for your consideration of this request and for your continued commitment to a thorough and collaborative legislative process. And that is sincerely from myself, the former facilities director of the city of Bedford, and from Fiona Maxwell, our chief procurement officer. Thank you, Paul. And, you know, I have appreciated the discussions we've had. I do think, you know, I am proposing some two minor changes to the ordinance tonight that I think we can agree on. There were a number of other changes in our discussions that, you know, I think the administration would like to see some different language in this ordinance. I don't necessarily think that whatever comes out of those discussions will necessarily be a joint recommendation that includes myself. That is, like, subject to further discussion. My personal perspective is that we are now in month seven of considering this ordinance, and I believe that we have an ordinance that is strong, that will meet the purposes and intent of the city council, and that we can approve tonight, and that we can continue to discuss the administration's proposed changes, and that those can come back before the council to amend this ordinance in the future as the administration sees fit. And I am more than happy to continue discussing those proposed differences, in some cases, I think, differences of policy with the administration, but I also believe that for a number of reasons we should move forward tonight. So that's my perspective. It differs from the perspective of the administration. With that, I'm happy to go to councilors for their perspective on how we should move forward now that you've heard from all involved. Vice President Lazaro. Thank you. I am comfortable moving forward with the third reading tonight. I think we've talked about this quite a lot and reviewed it quite a lot, and I don't see why there would be too much of a, why it would be opening us up to liability, and if it was, I would have liked to hear about that significantly earlier from our legal representation. So I'm happy to motion to approve the standard compensation ordinance for third reading. On that motion, is there a second? Seconded by Councilor Sanghan. I recognize Councilor Callahan and Councilor Sanghan. Thank you. I know we have been discussing this for many months, but for those folks who may be tuning in for the first time today, I would really appreciate if, I know President Behrs, you have been working closely and directly with many different parties to go over the wording, as well as working with the administration over the wording, and I would love it if you wouldn't mind summarizing where the wording and definitions that are in this ordinance come from, like if they come from other cities ordinances that have been in place for years, or like if you can give us a little bit of a summary so that the public can have some of the same knowledge that we have because we've been in these meetings, you know, for seven months. If you don't mind doing a little bit of a summary, I think that would be helpful. Sure, and I really encourage residents to go back to look at the committee of the whole meetings and the meeting for first reading that we held. There were some really great discussions from councilors. We heard from Peter Enrich, who's one of the, you know, Northeastern professor and has worked on a lot of this municipal law. This is a similar ordinance to ordinances that we see in Boston, Cambridge, Somerville. Much of the language comes from those different ordinances. There are some changes, some, I would dare say, improvements over the language that we see in Boston, Cambridge, and Somerville, but by and large, these are, this is similar policy to what other communities have implemented. It takes pieces from each of those ordinances. It also references state and, well, it originally was state, but it references some federal standards and some local standards in the city of Boston in terms of determining the wage rate, referencing contracts for janitorial services in, both for federal contracts and for the city of Boston. So that is a very short summary of where all of this comes from. You know, part of the history here is that the vast majority of services that cities and towns in Massachusetts procure are subject to prevailing wage, and these services, janitorial and security services, municipalities were exempted from prevailing wage schedules, and, you know, that's because of austerity. It's because cities and towns have been squeezed, and I just don't think when our budgets are squeezed that we should start with the workers who are most vulnerable and those workers who are doing work that we've decided we used to pay people to work for the city for, we've decided to contract out to a private contractor. That's not the place that we should start when we're facing budget issues. So there have been cities and towns who are our neighbors who have said the state doesn't make us do this anymore, but it's our community values that we want to do this anyway, and we believe that folks who are doing janitorial and security services who are keeping our buildings clean and well-maintained and safe should be paid living wages and benefits, or at least prevailing wages and benefits, fair wages and benefits, because cities shouldn't be participating in the race to the bottom. So I hope that is a fair summary. Thank you. I do appreciate that very much, and I just, I personally want to say that I really do think that we are in a moment in America where we are facing the largest gap in inequality that I believe has ever been recorded, and it is not just bad for the people at the bottom. It is bad for democracy. It is bad for all of us, and I think that as a city, I know that this city for many years was one of the few places where working-class people could buy a home and have a comfortable life, and I know that those people value unions, and they value supporting union labor, and they value supporting people who are doing the hard work that does not pay that well, but working hard, those people should be able to maintain their jobs when it is our own city hiring them. So to me, this is very important, and after seven months, I just, I'm not comfortable anymore with the, you know, the request for delay that is, well, we just want to keep, you know, workshopping the definitions and the language, and I think, you know, we can always revise this ordinance, but I feel very strongly that this is the values of our city and that we should really be taking action on this. So I am in favor, and I will be voting yes. Thank you. Thank you, Councilor Kelly and Councilor Sang. Thank you, President Behrs. I mean, I think, I was going to say period to everything you said. We truly, we truly, it's mind-boggling to me that in a, in a city that has purported to support unions, to support workers, it's something that I was taught from when I was really young, that unions built Medford, that the working class built the city, and that we should stand up for them. It does become mind-boggling to me at some point that we let vulnerable workers suffer the brunt of consequence, of the consequences of austerity. They're the first ones on that line being cut, being attacked, and as you noted, Councilor Callahan, you step back and you realize that Medford's not unique, that we are playing second...
